Docs: Update multi engine guide with gateway managed virtual layer info (#4171)
TobikoData/sqlmesh: docs/guides/multi_engine.md

Given this configuration, when a model’s gateway is set to duckdb, it will be materialized within the PostgreSQL `main_db` catalog, but it will be evaluated using DuckDB’s engine.

> Given this configuration, when a model’s gateway is set to duckdb, it will be materialized within the PostgreSQL `main_db` catalog, but it will be evaluated using DuckDB’s engine.

Author: yes good catch thanks

);

SELECT
  l_orderkey,
  l_shipdate
FROM
  iceberg_scan('data/bucket/lineitem_iceberg', allow_moved_paths = true);
```

In the `order_ship_date` model, the DuckDB engine is set, which will be used to create the physical table in the PostgreSQL database.

This allows you to efficiently scan data from an Iceberg table, or even query tables directly from S3 when used with the [HTTPFS](https://duckdb.org/docs/stable/extensions/httpfs/overview.html) extension.

![PostgreSQL + DuckDB](./multi_engine/postgres_duckdb.png)

In models where no gateway is specified, such as the `customer_orders` model, the default PostgreSQL engine will be used to create the physical table as well as to create and manage the views of the virtual layer.

### Gateway-Managed Virtual Layer

For projects where the engines don’t share a catalog or your raw data is located in different warehouses, you may prefer each gateway to manage its own virtual layer. This ensures isolation and each model’s views being created by its respective gateway.

To enable this, set `gateway_managed_virtual_layer` to `true` in your configuration. By default, this flag is set to false.

#### Example: Redshift + Athena + Snowflake

> Consider a scenario where you need to create a project with models in Redshift, Athena and Snowflake. To set this you, add the connections to your configuration and set the `gateway_managed_virtual_layer` flag:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Consider a scenario where you need to create a project with models in Redshift, Athena and Snowflake, where each engine hosts its models' virtual layer views.

First, add the connections to your configuration and set the `gateway_managed_virtual_layer` flag to `true`:
```

                host="<redshift_host>",
                database="<redshift_database>",
            ),
            variables={
                "gw_var": "redshift"
            },
        ),
        "athena": GatewayConfig(
            connection=AthenaConnectionConfig(
                aws_access_key_id="<athena_aws_access_key_id>",
                aws_secret_access_key="<athena_aws_secret_access_key>",
                region_name="<athena_region_name>",
                s3_warehouse_location="<athena_s3_warehouse_location>",
            ),
            variables={
                "gw_var": "athena"
            },
        ),
        "snowflake": GatewayConfig(
            connection=SnowflakeConnectionConfig(
                account="<snowflake_account>",
                user="<snowflake_user>",
                database="<snowflake_database>",
                warehouse="<snowflake_warehouse>",
            ),
            variables={
                "gw_var": "snowflake"
            },
        ),
    },
    default_gateway="redshift",
    gateway_managed_virtual_layer=True,
    variables={
        "gw_var": "global",
        "global_var": 5,
    },
)
```

> Note that gateway-specific variables take precedence over global ones. In the example above, the `gw_var` used in a model will take the value defined for the respective gateway.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note that gateway-specific variables take precedence over global ones. In the example above, the `gw_var` used in a model will resolve to the value specified in the model's gateway.
```

> For further customization, you can also enable [gateway-specific model defaults](../guides/configuration.md#gateway-specific-model-defaults). This allows you to define custom behaviors, such as specifying a dialect with case-insensitivity normalization.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For further customization, you can also enable [gateway-specific model defaults](../guides/configuration.md#gateway-specific-model-defaults). This allows you to define custom behaviors, such as specifying a dialect with case-insensitivity normalization.

The default gateway is `redshift` In the example configuration above, so all models without a `gateway` specification will run on redshift, as in this `order_dates` model:
```

```sql linenums="1"
MODEL (
  name redshift_schema.order_dates,
  table_format iceberg,
);

SELECT
  order_date,
  order_id
FROM
  bucket.raw_data;
```

> In this setup, since the default gateway is set to redshift, omitting the gateway from a model will default to this, as seen in the `order_dates` model above.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For the `athena_schema.order_status` model, we explicitly specify the `athena` gateway:
```

```sql linenums="1"
MODEL (
  name athena_schema.order_status,
  table_format iceberg,
  gateway athena,
);

SELECT
  order_id,
  status
FROM
  bucket.raw_data;
```

> While in the case of the `athena_schema.order_status` model above, the gateway is specified to athena explicitly.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Finally, specifying the `snowflake` gateway for the `customer_orders` model ensures it is isolated from the rest and reads from a table within the Snowflake database:
```

```sql linenums="1"
MODEL (
  name snowflake_schema.customer_orders,
  table_format iceberg,
  gateway snowflake
);

SELECT
  customer_id,
  orders
FROM
  bronze_schema.customer_data;
```

> Finally, specifying the snowflake gateway for the `customer_orders` model ensures it is isolated from the rest and sources from a table within the snowflake database.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

![Athena + Redshift + Snowflake](./multi_engine/athena_redshift_snowflake.png)

> When you run the plan, the catalogs for each model will be set automatically based on the gateway’s connection and each corresponding model will be evaluated against the specified engine.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When you run the plan, the catalogs for each model will be set automatically based on the gateway’s connection and each corresponding model will be evaluated against the specified engine.
```
```suggestion
When you run the plan, the catalogs for each model will be set automatically based on the gateway’s connection and each corresponding model will be executed by the specified engine:
```

```bash
❯ sqlmesh plan

`prod` environment will be initialized

Models:
└── Added:

>     ├── awsdatacatalog.athena_schema.order_status

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    ├── awsdatacatalog.athena_schema.order_status # each model uses its gateway's catalog and schema
```

    ├── redshift_schema.order_dates
    └── silver.snowflake_schema.customers
Models needing backfill:
├── awsdatacatalog.athena_schema.order_status: [full refresh]
├── redshift_schema.order_dates: [full refresh]
└── silver.snowflake_schema.customers: [full refresh]
Apply - Backfill Tables [y/n]: y
```

The views of the virtual layer will also be created by each corresponding engine.

This approach provides isolation between your models, while maintaining centralized control over your project.

> This allows users to leverage multiple engines within a single SQLMesh project, particularly as the industry shifts toward data lakes, open table formats, and greater interoperability.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
